For a long time, I went to bed early. Sometimes, as soon as my candle was extinguished, my eyes would close so quickly that I didn't have time to say to myself, "I'm falling asleep." And, half an hour later, the thought that it was time to seek sleep awakened me; I wanted to put down the volume that I thought I still had in my hands and blow out my light; I had not ceased while sleeping to reflect on what I had just read, but these reflections had taken on a rather particular turn; it seemed to me that I myself was what the book was about: a church, a quartet, the rivalry of François I and Charles V. This belief survived for a few seconds after I woke up; it didn't shock my sanity but weighed like scales on my eyes and prevented them from realizing that the candle holder was no longer lit. Then she began to become unintelligible to me, as after metempsychosis the thoughts of a previous existence; the subject of the book was detached from me, I was free to apply myself to it or not; Immediately I recovered my sight and I was astonished to find around me a darkness, soft and restful for my eyes, but perhaps even more for my mind, to which it appeared as a thing without cause, incomprehensible, like a really obscure thing. I wondered what time it could be; I heard the whistling of the trains which, more or less distant, like the song of a bird in a forest, taking up the distances, described to me the expanse of deserted countryside where the traveler hastens to the next station; and the little path he follows will be engraved in his memory by the excitement he owes to new places, to unusual acts, to the recent talk and to the farewells under the foreign lamp which still follow him in silence of the night, to the approaching sweetness of the return.
I pressed my cheeks tenderly against the beautiful cheeks of the pillow which, full and fresh, are like the cheeks of our childhood. I struck a match to look at my watch. Almost midnight. It was the moment when the patient, who had to go on a trip and had to sleep in an unknown hotel, awakened by a fit, rejoiced when he saw a ray of light under the door. What happiness, it's already morning! In a moment the servants will be up, he will be able to ring the bell, we will come to help him. The hope of being relieved gives him courage to suffer. He thought he heard footsteps; the steps come closer, then move away. And the day ray that was under his door is gone. It's midnight; the gas has just been turned off;
I would fall asleep again, and sometimes I had only brief awakenings of an instant, time to hear the organic creaking of the woodwork, to open my eyes to stare at the kaleidoscope of darkness, to taste thanks to a momentary glimmer of consciousness the sleep in which the furniture, the bedroom were plunged, all of which I was but a small part and to whose insensitivity I quickly returned to unite. Or else by sleeping I had effortlessly reached an age forever past in my primitive life, rediscovered such of my childish terrors as that which my great-uncle pulled me by my curls and which day had dissipated - date for me of a new era — where they had been cut off. I had forgotten this event during my sleep, I rediscovered it as soon as I
Sometimes, as Eve was born from an Adam's rib, a woman was born while I was sleeping from a false position of my thigh. Formed by the pleasure that I was about to taste, I imagined that it was she who offered it to me. My body which felt in its own heat wanted to join there, I woke up. The rest of the humans seemed very distant to me from this woman I had left just a few moments ago; my cheek was still warm from his kiss, my body aching from the weight of his waist. If, as it sometimes happened, she had the features of a woman I had known in life, I was going to give myself entirely to this goal: to find her, like those who go on a trip to see with their own eyes a desired city and imagine that one can taste the charm of a dream in a reality. Little by little his memory faded, I had forgotten the girl of my dream.
A man who sleeps holds in a circle around him the thread of the hours, the order of the years and of the worlds. He instinctively consults them when he wakes up and reads there in a second the point of the earth he occupies, the time which has elapsed until his awakening; but their ranks can mingle, break up. That towards the morning after some insomnia, sleep takes him reading, in a posture too different from that in which he usually sleeps, his raised arm is enough to stop and push back the sun, and at the first minute of his sleep. wake up, he will no longer know the time, he will think that he has just gone to bed. That if he dozes off in an even more out of place and divergent position, for example after dinner sitting in an armchair, then the upheaval will be complete in the desorbed worlds, the magic chair will make him travel at full speed in time and space, and when he opens his eyelids, he will think he was lying a few months earlier in another country. But it was enough that, in my very bed, my sleep was deep and completely relaxed my mind; then this one dropped the plan of the place where I had fallen asleep, and when I woke up in the middle of the night, since I did not know where I was, I did not even know at the first moment who I was; I had only in its first simplicity, the feeling of the existence as it can quiver at the bottom of an animal: I was more deprived than the man of the caverns; but then the memory — not yet of the place where I was, but of some of those I had lived in and where I could have been — came to me as a help from above to pull me out of the nothingness from which I could not have emerged on my own; I passed in a second over centuries of civilization, and the confusedly glimpsed image of kerosene lamps, then of shirts with turned down collars, gradually recomposed the original features of my self.
Perhaps the immobility of things around us is imposed on them by our certainty that they are they and not others, by the immobility of our thought in front of them. Still, when I woke up like this, my mind flickering to seek, without succeeding, to find out where I was, everything revolved around me in the dark, things, countries, years. My body, too numb to move, tried, according to the shape of its fatigue, to locate the position of its members to induce the direction of the wall, the place of the furniture, to rebuild and to name the house where it was . His memory, the memory of his ribs, of his knees, of his shoulders, successively presented several of the rooms where he had slept, while around him the invisible walls, changing places according to the shape of the imagined room, swirled in the darkness. And even before my thought, which hesitated at the threshold of time and form, had identified the home by relating the circumstances, it — my body — remembered for each one the type of bed, the position of the doors, the way daylight from the windows, the existence of a corridor, with the thought that I had when I fell asleep there and that I found when I woke up. My stiff side, trying to guess its orientation, imagined, for example, lying facing the wall in a large four-poster bed and immediately I said to myself: "Here, I ended up falling asleep even though mom did not come. say hello ", I was in the country with my grandfather, who died many years ago; and my body, the side on which I rested,
Then came the memory of a new attitude; the wall spun in another direction: I was in my room at Madame de Saint-Loup's, in the country; my God! It's at least ten o'clock, we must have finished dinner! I will have prolonged the nap I take every night too long when I come back from my walk with Madame de Saint-Loup, before putting on my coat. Because many years have passed since Combray, where, in our latest returns, it was the red reflections of the setting sun that I saw on the glass of my window. It's a different kind of life that we lead in Tansonville, at Mme de Saint-Loup's, a different kind of pleasure that I find in only going out at night, in following the paths where I used to play in the moonlight. once in the sun; and the room where I will have fallen asleep instead of dressing for dinner,
These whirling and confused evocations never lasted more than a few seconds; Often, my brief uncertainty of where I was standing did not distinguish better from one another the various assumptions of which it was made, than we do not isolate, by seeing a horse running, the successive positions which the kinetoscope shows us. But I had seen one, now the other, of the rooms I had lived in in my life, and I ended up remembering them all in the long reveries that followed my awakening; winter rooms where when you are lying down, you nestle your head in a nest that you weave with the most disparate things: a corner of the pillow, the top of the blankets, a piece of shawl, the edge of the reads, and an issue of the Pink Debates, which we end up cementing together using the bird technique, leaning on it indefinitely; where, in freezing weather, the pleasure we enjoy is to feel separated from the outside (like the sea swallow which has its nest at the bottom of a dungeon in the heat of the earth), and where, the fire being maintained all night long in the fireplace, we sleep in a large mantle of hot and smoky air, crossed by the lights of the embers which reignite, a sort of intangible alcove, a warm cave dug within the room itself, a fiery and mobile in its thermal contours, ventilated with breaths which refresh our faces and come from the angles, from the parts near the window or far from the hearth and which have cooled; - summer rooms where we like to be united with the night lukewarm, where the moonlight leaning against the shutters open, throws up to the foot of the bed its enchanted ladder, where one sleeps almost in the open air, like a tit swaying in the breeze at the tip of a ray—; sometimes the Louis XVI room, so cheerful that even on the first evening I had not been too unhappy there and where the small columns which lightly supported the ceiling moved aside with so much grace to show and reserve the place of the bed; sometimes, on the contrary, the one, small and so high in the ceiling, hollowed out in the shape of a pyramid in the height of two floors and partially covered with mahogany, where from the first second I had been morally intoxicated by the unknown smell of vetiver, convinced from the hostility of the purple curtains and the insolent indifference of the clock, which chattered aloud as if I hadn't been there; - where a strange and pitiless mirror with quadrangular legs, obliquely barring one of the angles of the room, was hollowed out in the soft plenitude of my accustomed visual field in a place which was not foreseen there; - where my thought, s' striving for hours to come apart, to stretch in height to take exactly the shape of the room and to manage to fill to the top its gigantic funnel, had suffered many hard nights, while I was lying in my bed , eyes raised, ear anxious, stubborn nostril, pounding heart: until habit had changed the color of the curtains, silenced the clock, taught pity to the slanted and cruel mirror, concealed, if not driven out completely, the smell of vetiver and notably reduced the apparent height of the ceiling. The habit! skilful but very slow landscaper who starts by letting our minds suffer for weeks in a temporary installation; but that in spite of everything he is very happy to find, for without habit and reduced to his own means he would be powerless to give us a habitable home.
Certainly, I was wide awake now, my body had veered one last time and the good angel of certainty had stopped everything around me, had laid me under my covers, in my room, and had put approximately in their place in the darkness my dresser, my desk, my fireplace, the window on the street and the two doors. But in vain I knew that I was not in the dwellings where the ignorance of the awakening had in an instant if not presented the distinct image to me, at least made believe the possible presence, the movement was given to my memory; generally I did not try to go back to sleep right away; I spent most of the night remembering our old life, in Combray with my great-aunt, in Balbec, in Paris, in Doncières, in Venice, elsewhere still,
In Combray, every day from the end of the afternoon, long before the moment when I would have to go to bed and stay, without sleeping, far from my mother and my grandmother, my bedroom was once again the fixed and painful point of my concerns. They had indeed invented, to distract me on evenings when they found me looking too unhappy, to give me a magic lantern, with which, while waiting for dinner, my lamp was capped; and, like the first architects and master glassmakers of the Gothic age, she substituted for the opacity of the walls impalpable iridescence, supernatural multicolored apparitions, where legends were depicted as in a vacillating and momentary stained glass window. But my sadness was only increased, because nothing that the change of lighting destroyed the I was used to my room and thanks to which, except for the torture of bedtime, it had become bearable to me. Now I no longer recognized it and was worried about it, as in a hotel room or "chalet", where I had arrived for the first time by getting off the railroad.
With the jerky step of his horse, Golo, full of a dreadful design, came out of the small triangular forest which velvety in a dark green the slope of a hill, and advanced with a tremor towards the castle of poor Geneviève de Brabant. This castle was cut along a curved line which was none other than the limit of one of the glass ovals formed in the frame which was slid between the wings of the lantern. It was only a section of the castle and in front of him he had a moor where Geneviève was dreaming, who was wearing a blue belt. The castle and the moor were yellow and I hadn't waited to see them to know their color because, before the glasses on the frame, the bronze tone of the name Brabant had clearly shown it to me. Golo s' stopped for a moment to listen with sadness to the sales pitch read aloud by my great aunt and which he seemed to understand perfectly, conforming his attitude with a docility which did not exclude a certain majesty, to the indications of the text; then he walked away with the same jerky step. And nothing could stop his slow ride. If we moved the lantern, I could make out Golo's horse, which continued to advance over the window curtains, bulging with their folds, descending into their slits. The body of Golo himself, of an essence as supernatural as that of his mount, arranged itself of any material obstacle, of any inconvenient object which it encountered by taking it as a framework and making it interior, even though it was. this the button of the door on which
Certainly I found them charming in these brilliant projections which seemed to emanate from a Merovingian past and carried around me such ancient reflections of history. But I cannot say what uneasiness this intrusion of mystery and beauty caused me in a room that I had ended up filling with myself to the point of not paying more attention to her than to himself. The numbing influence of the habit having ceased, I began to think, to feel, things so sad. This knob on my bedroom door, which for me was different from all the other door knobs in the world in that it seemed to open by itself, without my needing to turn it, so much had become of the handling. unconscious, he was now serving as Golo's astral body. And as soon as we rang for dinner, I couldn't wait to run to the dining room, where the big pendant lamp, ignorant of Golo and Bluebeard, and who knew my parents and the beef in the pan, gave off its light every night; and to fall into the arms of mamma, whom the misfortunes of Geneviève de Brabant made me dearer to me, while Golo's crimes made me examine my own conscience with more scruples.
After dinner, unfortunately, I was soon obliged to leave Mum, who remained to chat with the others, in the garden if the weather was fine, in the small living room where everyone retired if the weather was bad. Everyone, except my grandmother who found that "it is a pity to stay locked up in the countryside" and who had incessant discussions with my father, on days of too much rain, because he sent me read in my room instead of staying outside. "This is not how you will make him strong and energetic," she said sadly, "especially this little one who needs so much to gain strength and will." My father shrugged his shoulders and examined the barometer, for he loved meteorology, while my mother, avoiding making noise so as not to disturb him, looked at him with tender respect, but not too fixedly not to seek to unravel the mystery of his superiorities. But my grandmother, she, in all weathers, even when the rain was raging and Francoise had hastily brought in the precious wicker armchairs for fear that they would be wet, she could be seen in the empty garden and whipped by the downpour, lifting up his messy gray locks so that his forehead was better soaked in the salubrity of the wind and the rain. She said: "Finally, we breathe!" and strolled through the sodden paths — too symmetrically aligned for his liking by the new gardener deprived of the feeling for nature and to whom my father had asked since morning if the weather would improve — with his small, enthusiastic, jerky step, set to the various movements that
When these tours of my grandmother's garden took place after dinner, one thing had the power to make her come in: it was, at one of the moments when the revolution of her walk periodically brought her back, like an insect, in front of the trees. lights of the little drawing-room where the liqueurs were served on the gaming table —if my great-aunt cried to her: "Bathilde! come and stop your husband from drinking cognac!" To tease her, in fact (she had brought into my father's family such a different spirit that everyone joked and tormented her), as liqueurs were forbidden to my grandfather, my great aunt made her drink them. few drops. My poor grandmother came in and begged her husband ardently not to taste the brandy; he got angry, took his sip all the same, and my grandmother left, sad, discouraged, smiling nevertheless, for she was so humble of heart and so sweet that her tenderness for others and the little regard she made of herself and her sufferings, were reconciled in her gaze in a smile where , contrary to what we see in the faces of many humans, there was only irony for herself, and for all of us like a kiss from her eyes that could not see those she cherished without caressing them passionately. This torture inflicted on him by my great-aunt, the sight of my grandmother's vain prayers and of her weakness, conquered in advance, trying in vain to take my grandfather's shot glass, it was one of those things you get used to later until to look at them with a laugh and to side with the persecutor resolutely and cheerfully enough to convince oneself that it is not a question of persecution; they caused me such horror then that I would have liked to beat my great aunt. But as soon as I heard: "Bathilde, come and stop your husband from drinking cognac!" already a man through cowardice, I did what we all do, once we are grown up, when there is suffering and injustice before us: I did not want to see them; I went up to sob at the top of the house next to the study room, under the roofs, in a small room smelling of iris, and which also scented a wild blackcurrant grown outside between the stones of the wall and which passed a branch of flowers through the half-open window. Intended for a more special and vulgar use, this room, from which one could see during the day as far as the Roussainville-le-Pin dungeon, served for a long time as a refuge for me, no doubt because it was the only that I was allowed to lock up all those of my occupations which demanded an inviolable solitude: reading, reverie, tears and pleasure. Alas! I did not know that, much more sadly than the small deviations in her husband's diet, my lack of will, my delicate health, the uncertainty they projected on my future, worried my grandmother, during these wanderings incessant afternoon and evening, when we could see pass and pass again, obliquely raised towards the sky, his beautiful face with brown and furrowed cheeks, which had become on the return of the
My only consolation, when I went up to bed, was that mom would come and kiss me when I was in bed. But this good evening lasted so short, she was coming down again so quickly, that the moment I heard her coming up, then the light sound of her blue muslin garden dress, from which little children hung in the hallway, passed through the double door. braided straw cords, was for me a painful moment. He announced the one who was going to follow him, where she would have left me, where she would have come down. So that this good evening that I loved so much, I came to the point of wishing that it would come as late as possible, that the time of respite extended when Mum had not yet come. Sometimes when, after kissing me, she opened the door to leave, I wanted to call her back, tell her " were still mild compared to those where there were people at dinner and where, because of that, she did not come up to say goodnight. The world was usually confined to Mr. Swann, who, apart from a few passing strangers, was about the only person who came to us in Combray, sometimes to dine next door (more rarely since he had done this bad marriage, because my parents did not want to receive his wife), sometimes after dinner, unexpectedly. On the evenings when, seated in front of the house under the large chestnut tree, around the iron table, we heard at the end of the garden, not the profuse and screaming bell that watered, which made you dizzy in passing with its ferruginous noise, inexhaustible and icy, any person in the house who triggered it by entering "without ringing", but the timid, oval, golden double ringing of the bell for strangers, everyone immediately wondered: "A visit, who can that be?" but it was well known that it could only be M. Swann; my great-aunt speaking aloud, to preach by example, in a tone which she tried to make natural, said not to whisper thus; that nothing is more derogatory for a person who arrives and to whom this makes believe that one is saying things that he should not hear; and they sent my grandmother to scout, always happy to have a pretext to take another tour of the garden, and who took the opportunity to surreptitiously tear off a few rose stakes in order to give the roses a little natural, like a mother who, to make them eat,
We all hung on the news that my grandmother was going to bring us about the enemy, as if we could have hesitated between a large number of possible assailants, and soon after my grandfather would say: "I recognize Swann's voice. . " We only recognized him by the voice, we could hardly make out his face with its hooked nose, green eyes, under a high forehead surrounded by almost red blond hair, combed in Bressant style, because we kept as little light as possible. in the garden so as not to attract mosquitoes and I was going, without appearing to be, to say that the syrups were brought; my grandmother attached a great deal of importance, finding it more agreeable, to them not appearing to appear in an exceptional way, and for visits only. Mr. Swann, although much younger than him, was very close to my grandfather who had been one of his father's best friends, an excellent but singular man, with whom, it seems, a little nothing was sometimes enough to interrupt the impulses of the heart, to change the course of thought. Several times a year I heard my grandfather tell anecdotes at the table, always the same about the attitude that Mr. Swann the father had had at the death of his wife, whom he had watched day and night. My grandfather, who had not seen him for a long time, had come to him on the property that the Swanns owned in the vicinity of Combray, and had succeeded, so that he did not assist at the beer brewing, to him. to leave for a moment, all in tears, the death chamber. They took a few steps in the park where there was a little sun. All of suddenly, M. Swann, taking my grandfather by the arm, exclaimed: "Ah! my old friend, what a joy to walk together in this fine weather. You do not find all these trees, these hawthorns pretty. and my pond, on which you have never congratulated me? You look like a nightcap. Do you feel that little wind? Ah, no matter what, life is good all the same, my dear Amédée! " Suddenly the memory of his dead wife came back to him, and undoubtedly finding it too complicated to find out how he had been able at such a moment to indulge in a movement of joy, he contented himself, with a gesture which was familiar to him every time a difficult question presented itself to his mind, to run his hand over his forehead, to wipe his eyes and the glasses of his eyeglass. Yet he could not console himself for the death of his wife, but during the two years he survived him, he used to say to my grandfather: "It's funny, I think of my poor wife very often, but I can't think of her much at once." "Often, but little at a time, like poor Father Swann", had become one of my grandfather's favorite phrases, which he said about the most different things. It would have seemed to me that Swann's father was a monster, if my grandfather, whom I considered to be the best judge and whose sentence setting a precedent for me, has often served me in the following to absolve the faults that I have had. was inclined to condemn, did not exclaim: "But how? it was a heart of gold!" I think of my poor wife very often, but I can't think about her much at once. "" Often, but little at a time, like poor Father Swann ", had become one of my grandfather's favorite phrases, pronounced about the most different things. It would have seemed to me that this father of Swann was a monster, if my grandfather whom I considered as the best judge and whose sentence setting precedent for me, often served me in the after absolving faults that I would have been inclined to condemn, did not cry out: "But how? it was a heart of gold! " I think of my poor wife very often, but I can't think about her much at once. "" Often, but little at a time, like poor Father Swann ", had become one of my grandfather's favorite phrases, pronounced about the most different things. It would have seemed to me that this father of Swann was a monster, if my grandfather whom I considered as the best judge and whose sentence setting precedent for me, often served me in the after absolving faults that I would have been inclined to condemn, did not cry out: "But how? it was a heart of gold! " had become one of my grandfather's favorite phrases, saying it about the most different things. It would have seemed to me that Swann's father was a monster, if my grandfather, whom I considered to be the best judge and whose sentence setting a precedent for me, has often served me in the following to absolve the faults that I have had. was inclined to condemn, did not exclaim: "But how? it was a heart of gold!" had become one of my grandfather's favorite phrases, saying it about the most different things. It would have seemed to me that Swann's father was a monster, if my grandfather, whom I considered to be the best judge and whose sentence setting a precedent for me, has often served me in the following to absolve the faults that I have had. was inclined to condemn, did not exclaim: "But how? it was a heart of gold!"
For many years, when, however, especially before my marriage, Mr. Swann, the son, often came to see them at Combray, my great-aunt and my grandparents did not suspect that he no longer lived in society at all. that his family had frequented and that under the kind of incognito that this name Swann gave him in our country, they were lodging, - with the perfect innocence of honest hotel-keepers who have at home, without knowing it, a famous brigand, —One of the most elegant members of the Jockey-Club, favorite friend of the Count of Paris and the Prince of Wales, one of the most pampered men of high society in the Faubourg Saint-Germain.
Our ignorance of this brilliant worldly life led by Swann was evidently partly due to the reserve and discretion of his character, but also to the fact that the bourgeois of the time had a somewhat Hindu idea of ​​society and considered it to be made up of closed castes in which each, from birth, found himself placed in the rank occupied by his parents, and from which nothing, unless the chances of an exceptional career or an unexpected marriage, could shoot you to get you into a higher caste. M. Swann, the father, was a stockbroker; the "Swann son" happened to belong for all his life to a caste where fortunes, as in a category of taxpayers, varied between such and such income. We knew what his father's company had been, we therefore knew which were his, with which people he was "in a position" to mate. If he knew others, they were young man's relationships on which old friends of his family, like my parents, closed their eyes all the more benevolently as he continued, since he was an orphan, to come very faithfully to see us; but it was a safe bet that these people, unknown to us, whom he saw, were those whom he would not have dared to greet if, being with us, he had met them. If one had wanted at all costs to apply to Swann a social coefficient which was personal to him, among the other sons of agents of a situation equal to that of his parents, this coefficient would have been for him a little lower because, very simple in a way and having always had an "infatuation" with old objects and paintings, he now lived in an old hotel where he piled up his collections and that my grandmother dreamed of visiting, but which was located on the Quai d'Orléans , a neighborhood that my great-aunt found infamous to live in. "Are you only a connoisseur? I ask you this for your sake, because you have to have your greats ironed by the merchants," my great aunt would say to her; she did not in fact suppose any competence in him and did not have a high idea even from the intellectual point of view of a man who in conversation avoided serious matters and showed a very prosaic precision not only when he gave us, entering into smallest details, cooking recipes, but even when my grandmother's sisters talked about artistic subjects. Provoked by them to give his opinion, to express his admiration for a painting, he kept an almost derogatory silence and made up for it on the other hand if he could provide on the museum where he was, on the date when it had been painted, a material intelligence. But usually he was content to try to amuse us by telling each time a new story that had just happened to him with people chosen from among those we knew, with the pharmacist at Combray, with our cook, with our coachman. These stories certainly made my great-aunt laugh, but without her distinguishing whether it was because of the ridiculous role that Swann always played in them or of the spirit he put into telling them: " We can say that you are a real type, Mr. Swann! "As she was the only slightly vulgar person in our family, she was careful to point out to strangers, when we spoke of Swann, that he could have been he had wanted to live on Boulevard Haussmann or Avenue de l'Opéra, that he was the son of M. Swann who must have left him four or five millions, but that it was his fancy. to be so entertaining for others that in Paris, when M. Swann came on January 1st to bring her his bag of candied chestnuts, she did not fail, if there were people, to say to him: "Well! Mr. Swann, do you still live near the Wine Warehouse, to make sure you don't miss the train when you take the Chemin de Lyon? "
But if we had told my grandmother that this Swann who, as a son of Swann, was perfectly "qualified" to be received by the whole "beautiful bourgeoisie", by the notaries or the most esteemed attorneys in Paris ( privilege which he seemed to let fall a little in distaff), had, as if in secret, a very different life; that when leaving our house, in Paris, after telling us that he was coming back to bed, he hardly turned back the street turned and went into such a salon that never the eye of any agent or agent's associate hadn't contemplated it, it would have seemed as extraordinary to my aunt as it would have been for a more literate lady the thought of being personally linked with Aristaeus, whom she would have understood was going, after having talked with her, to dive into the kingdoms of Thetis, into an empire hidden from the eyes of mortals and where Virgil shows him received with open arms; or, to stick with an image that was more likely to occur to her, for she had seen it painted on our small oven plates at Combray — of having had Ali-Baba for dinner, which when he knows he is alone, he will enter the cave, dazzling with unsuspected treasures.
One day he had come to see us in Paris after dinner, apologizing for being dressed, Françoise having, after his departure, said that he thought of the coachman that he had dined "at a princess's" - "Yes, at a princess of the demi-monde! " replied my aunt, shrugging her shoulders without looking up from her knitting, with serene irony.
So my great-aunt used it cavalierly with him. As she believed that he must be flattered by our invitations, she found it quite natural that he did not come to see us in the summer without having in his hand a basket of peaches or raspberries from his garden and that of each of his trips from Italy he would have brought me photographs of masterpieces.
We did not hesitate to send for him as soon as we needed a recipe for gribiche sauce or pineapple salad for big dinners where we did not invite him, not finding him sufficient prestige to that it could be served to strangers who came for the first time. If the conversation fell on the princes of the House of France: "people that we will never know neither you nor me and we do without, right", said my great-aunt to Swann who had perhaps to be in his pocket a letter from Twickenham; she made him push the piano and turn the pages on the evenings when my grandmother's sister sang, having to handle this being so sought after elsewhere, the naive abruptness of a child who plays with a collector's trinket without more precautions than ' with a cheap item. Doubtless the Swann that so many clubmen knew at the same time was very different from the one created by my great-aunt, when in the evening, in the little garden of Combray, after the two hesitant blows of the bell had sounded, she injected and invigorated everything she knew about the Swann family, the obscure and uncertain character who stood out, followed by my grandmother, against a background of darkness, and that we recognized by the voice. But even from the point of view of the most insignificant things in life, we are not a materially constituted whole, identical for everyone and which everyone has only to go and take cognizance of as a specification or a will; our social personality is a creation of the thought of others. Even the so simple act that we call "seeing a person we know" is partly an intellectual act. We fill the physical appearance of the being that we see, with all the notions that we have about him and in the total aspect that we represent to ourselves, these notions certainly have the greatest part. They end up inflating the cheeks so perfectly, by following the line of the nose with such exact adherence, they blend so well to nuance the sonority of the voice as if it were only a transparent envelope, that each time that we see this face and that we hear this voice, it is these notions that we rediscover, that we listen to. Undoubtedly, in the Swann that they had formed, my parents had ignorantly omitted to bring in a host of peculiarities of his worldly life which were cause that other people, when they were in his presence, saw the elegance reign in his face and stop at his hooked nose as in their natural border; but also they could have piled up in that disaffected face of its prestige, vacant and spacious, at the bottom of those depreciated eyes, the vague and sweet residue - half-memory, half-oblivion - of the idle hours spent together after our weekly dinners. , around the game table or in the garden, during our life as a good country neighbor. Our friend's body envelope had been so full of it, as well as some memories relating to his parents, that this Swann had become a complete and living being, and I have
Yet one day my grandmother had gone to ask a service to a lady she had known at the Sacred Heart (and with whom, because of our conception of castes, she had not wanted to stay in touch despite mutual sympathy. ), the Marquise de Villeparisis, of the famous family of Bouillon, she had said to her: "I think you know M. Swann a lot, who is a great friend of my nephews in Laumes". My grandmother had returned from her visit enthusiastic about the house which overlooked the gardens and where Mme de Villeparisis advised her to rent, and also from a waistcoat and her daughter, who had their shop in the courtyard and to whom she had entered. ask that a stitch be made to her skirt which she had torn on the stairs. My grandmother had found these perfect people, she declared that the little one was a pearl and that the waistcoat was the most distinguished man, the best she had ever seen. Because for her, the distinction was something absolutely independent of social rank. She was ecstatic over an answer that the waistcoat had given her, telling mum: "Sévigné could not have said better!" and on the other hand, from a nephew of Mme de Villeparisis whom she had met at home: "Ah! my daughter, how common it is!" "and on the other hand, from a nephew of Mme de Villeparisis whom she had met at home:" Ah! my daughter, how common it is! " "and on the other hand, from a nephew of Mme de Villeparisis whom she had met at home:" Ah! my daughter, how common it is! "
However, the words relating to Swann had had the effect not to raise him up in my great-aunt's mind, but to lower Madame de Villeparisis to it. It seemed that the consideration which, on the faith of my grandmother, we accorded to Madame de Villeparisis, created a duty on her to do nothing which made her less worthy and which she had failed on learning of Swann's existence. , by allowing relatives of her to frequent him. "How does she know Swann? For a person you claimed to be related to Marshal Mac-Mahon!" This opinion of my parents on Swann's relations then seemed to them to be confirmed by his marriage to a woman of the worst society, almost a casserole that, moreover, he never tried to present, continuing to come to us alone, although less and less, but
But once, my grandfather read in a newspaper that M. Swann was one of the most faithful regulars at Sunday lunches with the Duke of X ..., whose father and uncle had been the statesmen. more in view of the reign of Louis-Philippe. Now my grandfather was curious about all the little facts which could help him enter through thought into the private lives of men like Molé, like the Duke Pasquier, like the Duke de Broglie. He was delighted to learn that Swann was dating people who had known them. My great-aunt, on the contrary, interpreted this news in a way unfavorable to Swann: someone who chose his associates outside the caste in which he was born, outside his social "class", suffered in his eyes an unfortunate downgrading. It seemed to him that we were giving up a blow to the fruit of all the beautiful relationships with well-placed people, which the far-sighted families had honorably maintained and garnered for their children; (my great-aunt had even stopped seeing the son of a notary of our friends because he had married a highness and had thereby descended for her from the respected rank of son of a notary to that of one of these adventurers, former valets or stable boys, for whom it is said that the queens were sometimes kind). She blamed my grandfather's plan to question Swann the next evening when he was to come to dinner, about these friends we discovered in him. On the other hand, my grandmother's two sisters, old girls who had her noble nature but not her spirit, said they did not understand the pleasure their brother-in-law could find in talking about such nonsense. They were people of high aspirations and who for that very reason were incapable of taking an interest in what is called gossip, even if it was of historical interest, and in general in anything that was not. not directly related to an aesthetic or virtuous object. The disinterestedness of their thought was such, with regard to everything which, near or far seemed to be connected with the worldly life, that their auditory sense, - having ended by understanding its momentary uselessness as soon as at dinner the conversation took on a frivolous tone or just down to earth without these two old ladies having been able to bring her back to the subjects that were dear to them, - then put its receptor organs to rest and let them undergo a real beginning of atrophy. If then my grandfather needed to attract the attention of the two sisters, he had to have recourse to those physical warnings which alienist doctors use with regard to certain maniacs of distraction: blows struck several times on a glass with the blade of a knife, coinciding with a sudden interpellation of the voice and the gaze, violent means that these psychiatrists often carry in the current relations with people in good health, either by professional habit, or they believe everyone a little crazy.
They were more interested when the day before Swann was to come to dinner, and had personally sent them a case of wine from Asti, my aunt, holding a number of Figaro or next to the name of a painting that was at an Exhibition de Corot, there were these words: "from the collection of M. Charles Swann", tells us: "Did you see that Swann has" the honors "of Le Figaro?" - "But I have always told you that he had great taste, ”says my grandmother. "Of course you, as long as it is a question of being of a different opinion than us," replied my great aunt who, knowing that my grandmother was never of the same opinion as her, and 'being of course sure that it was to herself that we were always right, wanted to wrest from us a complete condemnation of the opinions of my grandmother against which she tried to solidarize us by force with her own. But we remained silent. My grandmother's sisters having indicated their intention to speak to Swann about this word from Le Figaro, my great-aunt advised them against it. Whenever she saw in others an advantage however small that she did not have, she convinced herself that it was not an advantage but an evil and she felt sorry for them so as not to have to envy them. "I don't think you would please him; I know very well that it would be very unpleasant for me to see my name printed all alive like that in the newspaper, and I would not be flattered at all to be told about it. " She did not stubbornly elsewhere to persuade my grandmother's sisters; for these out of horror of vulgarity pushed so far the art of concealing under ingenious circumlocutions a personal allusion which it often went unnoticed by the very person to whom it was addressed. As for my mother, she only thought of trying to get my father to agree to talk to Swann not about his wife but about his daughter whom he adored and because of which, it was said, he had ended up doing this marriage. "You could just say one word to her, ask her how she is. It must be so cruel to him." But my father got angry: "No, you have absurd ideas. That would be ridiculous." art of concealing under ingenious paraphrases a personal allusion that she often went unnoticed by the very person to whom she was addressing. As for my mother, she only thought of trying to get my father to agree to talk to Swann not about his wife but about his daughter whom he adored and because of which, it was said, he had ended up doing this marriage. "You could just say one word to her, ask her how she is. It must be so cruel to him." But my father got angry: "No, you have absurd ideas. That would be ridiculous." art of concealing under ingenious paraphrases a personal allusion that she often went unnoticed by the very person to whom she was addressing. As for my mother, she only thought of trying to get my father to agree to talk to Swann not about his wife but about his daughter whom he adored and because of which, it was said, he had ended up doing this marriage. "You could just say one word to her, ask her how she is. It must be so cruel to him." But my father got angry: "No, you have absurd ideas. That would be ridiculous." he adored and because of which it was said he had ended up making this marriage. "You could just say one word to her, ask her how she is. It must be so cruel to him." But my father got angry: "No, you have absurd ideas. That would be ridiculous." he adored and because of which it was said he had ended up making this marriage. "You could just say one word to her, ask her how she is. It must be so cruel to him." But my father got angry: "No, you have absurd ideas. That would be ridiculous."
But the only one of us for whom Swann's coming became the object of painful preoccupation was me. It was because on evenings when strangers, or only M. Swann, were there, Maman did not come up to my room. I didn't dine at the table, I came after dinner in the garden, and at nine o'clock I said goodnight and went to bed. I had dinner before everyone else and then I would come and sit at the table, until eight o'clock when it was agreed that I should go up; this precious and fragile kiss that mom usually gave me in my bed when I fell asleep I had to carry it from the dining room to my room and keep it during the whole time I was undressing, without breaking its sweetness, without spreading and evaporating its volatile virtue and, precisely on those evenings when I would have needed to receive it with more precaution, I had to take it, that I steal it suddenly, publicly, without even having the time and the freedom of spirit necessary to bring to what I was paying this attention of the maniacs who try not to think of anything else as they close a door, in order to be able, when sickly uncertainty returns to them, to victoriously oppose it with the memory of the moment when they closed it. We were all in the garden when the two hesitant knocks of the bell rang. We knew it was Swann; nevertheless everyone looked at each other questioningly and my grandmother was sent to reconnoitre. "Remember to thank him intelligibly for his wine, you know it is delicious and the case is huge, my grandfather recommended to his two sisters-in-law. "" Don't start whispering, said my great aunt. How comfortable it is to arrive in a house where everyone is talking in a low voice. "" Ah! here is Mr. Swann. We're going to ask him if he thinks the weather will be fine tomorrow, "said my father. My mother thought a word from her would erase all the grief that our family had caused Swann since her marriage. She found out. the way to take her away a little. But I followed her; I could not make up my mind to take a step away from her, thinking that later I would have to leave her in the dining room and that I go back to my room without having, like other evenings, the consolation that she came to kiss me. "Come, Monsieur Swann," she said to him, " tell me a little about your daughter; I'm sure she already has a taste for fine works like her daddy. "" But come and sit with all of us on the veranda, "said my grandfather, approaching. My mother had to stop herself. , but she drew from this very constraint one more delicate thought, like the good poets whom the tyranny of rhyme forces to find their greatest beauties: "We will speak of her again when we are both together," she said halfway. -voice to Swann. There is only one mother who is worthy of understanding you. I'm sure he would agree with me. "We all sat down around the iron table. I wished I hadn't thought of the anguished hours I would spend tonight alone in my room without being able to fall asleep; I tried to convince myself that they were of no importance, since I would have forgotten them tomorrow morning, to attach myself to ideas for the future which should have led me as if on a bridge beyond the next abyss which will lead me to 'scared. But my mind, strained by my preoccupation, made convex like the gaze I darted at my mother, did not allow itself to be penetrated by any foreign impression. Thoughts did enter him well, but on condition that I left out any element of beauty or simply of humor that had touched or distracted me. Like a patient, thanks to an anesthetic, attends with full lucidity the operation being performed on him, but without feeling anything, I could recite verses that I liked to myself or observe the efforts that my grandfather made. to talk to Swann about the Duke of Audiffret-Pasquier, without the first making me feel any emotion, the second no gaiety. These efforts were unsuccessful. No sooner had my grandfather asked Swann a question relating to this orator than one of my grandmother's sisters in whose ears this question resounded like a deep but untimely silence and which it was polite to break, called out the other: "Imagine, Celine, that I met a young Swedish teacher who gave me all the most interesting details about cooperatives in Scandinavian countries. She'll have to come and have dinner here one night. " "I think so!" Replied his sister Flora, "but I did not waste my time either. I met at M. Vinteuil's house an old scholar who knows Maubant a lot, and to whom Maubant explained in great detail how he goes about composing a role. This is all that is most interesting. He is a neighbor of M. Vinteuil, I did not know; and he is very amiable. "" It is not only M. Vinteuil who has amiable neighbors, "cried my aunt Céline, in a voice that shyness made strong and premeditation made false, while throwing on Swann what she called a meaningful look. At the same time my aunt Flora who understood that this sentence was Celine's thanks for Asti's wine, was also looking at Swann with an air of mingled congratulation and irony, either simply to underline her sister's wit, either that she envied Swann for having inspired him, or that she could not prevent laughing at him because she believed him to be in the hot seat. "I think we can succeed in having this gentleman for dinner," continued Flora; "when you put him on Maubant or on Mme Materna, he talks for hours without stopping." "It must be delicious," sighed my grandfather in whose mind nature had unfortunately also completely failed to include the possibility of being passionately interested in Swedish cooperatives or in the composition of Maubant's roles, as she did. had forgotten to provide that of my grandmother's sisters with a little grain of salt that you have to add yourself to find some flavor, to a story on the intimate life of Molé or the Comte de Paris. "Here, said Swann to my grandfather, what I'm about to tell you has more to do with it than it does. air with what you asked me, because on certain points things have not changed enormously. This morning I was rereading something in Saint-Simon that would have amused you. It is in the volume on his Spanish Embassy; it is not one of the best, it is hardly more than a newspaper, but at least a wonderfully written newspaper, which already makes a first difference with the boring newspapers that we believe ourselves obliged to read morning and evening. " "I do not agree with you, there are days when reading the newspapers seems very pleasant to me ..." interrupted my aunt Flora, to show that she had read the sentence on Swann's Corot in Le Figaro. . "When they talk about things or people that interest us!" Bid my aunt Celine. "I'm not saying no, replied Swann, astonished. My fault with newspapers is that we pay attention to trivial things every day while we read the essential books three or four times in our life. As long as we feverishly tear the strip of the newspaper every morning, then we should change things and put in the newspaper, I don't know, the ... Pensées de Pascal! (he detached the word with ironic emphasis so as not to sound pedantic). And it is in the gilded volume on slices that we only open once every ten years, he added, testifying for worldly things that disdain which certain men of the world affect, which we would only read. Queen of Greece went to Cannes or the Princess of Leon gave a costume ball. I do not know if it was ignorance or panel, writes Saint-Simon, he wanted to give his hand to my children. I noticed it early enough to prevent it. "My grandfather was already ecstatic about" ignorance or sign ", but Mlle Céline, in whom the name of Saint-Simon - a man of letters - had prevented complete anesthesia of the hearing faculties, was already indignant: "How? do you admire that? Well! it's pretty! But what can that mean; is not one man as much as another? What does it matter whether he is a duke or a coachman if he has intelligence and a heart? He had a fine way of bringing up his children, your Saint-Simon, if he did not tell them to give a hand to all honest people. But it is simply abominable. And you dare to quote that? "And my heartbroken grandfather, feeling the impossibility, in the face of this obstruction, of trying to get Swann to tell the stories which would have amused him, said in a low voice to mum:" Remind me then the verse that you taught me and which relieves me so much in those moments. Ah! yes: "Lord, how many virtues you make us hate!" Ah! how good! "
I never took my eyes off my mother, I knew that when we were at the table, I would not be allowed to stay for the duration of the dinner and that in order not to upset my father, mum would not let me kiss him several times times in front of the world, as if it had been in my room. So I promised myself, in the dining room, while we started to have dinner and I could feel the hour approaching, to do in advance of this kiss which would be so short and stealthy, all that I could do. alone, to choose with my eyes the place of the cheek that I would kiss, to prepare my thoughts so as to be able, thanks to this mental beginning of kissing, to devote all the minute that mom would grant me to feel her cheek against my lips, like a painter who can only get short posing sessions, prepares his palette, and has done in advance from memory, according to his notes, all that he could possibly do without the presence of the model. But behold, before dinner was over my grandfather had the unconscious ferocity of saying: "The little one looks tired, he should go up to bed. We're having dinner tonight anyway." And my father, who didn't keep the faith of treaties as scrupulously as my grandmother and my mother, said, "Yes, let's go, go to bed." I wanted to kiss mum, at that moment we heard the dinner bell. "But no, come on, leave your mother, you said goodnight enough like that, these demonstrations are ridiculous. Come on, go up!" And I had to leave without viaticum; I had to climb every step of the stairs, as the popular expression says, with "reluctance", rising against my heart which wanted to return to my mother because she had not, by kissing me, given her license to follow me. That hated staircase where I always walked so sadly, exhaled a smell of varnish that had somehow absorbed, fixed, that particular kind of sorrow that I felt every night and made it perhaps even more cruel to my sensitivity because in this olfactory form my intelligence could no longer take its part. When we are asleep and a toothache is still perceived by us only as a young girl whom we strive two hundred times in a row to draw from the water or as a verse from Molière that we repeat without stopping , vs' is a great relief to wake up and our intelligence can rid the idea of ​​toothache, of all heroic or rhythmic disguise. It is the reverse of the relief I felt when my grief at going up to my room entered me in an infinitely faster, almost instantaneous, both insidious and abrupt way, through inhalation - much more. toxic than moral penetration — the odor of varnish peculiar to this staircase. Once in my room, I had to block all the exits, close the shutters, dig my own tomb, undo my blankets, put on the shroud of my nightgown. But before burying myself in the iron bed that had been added to the bedroom because I was too hot in the summer under the curtain walls of the large bed, I had a movement of revolt, I wanted to try a ruse of condemned man. I wrote to my mother begging her to come upstairs about something serious that I couldn't tell her in my letter. My fear was that Françoise, my aunt's cook who was in charge of looking after me when I was at Combray, would refuse to take my word. I suspected that for her, doing an errand for my mother when there were people there would seem as impossible to her as for the doorman of a theater to give a letter to an actor while he is on stage. She possessed with regard to things which may or may not be made an imperious, abundant, subtle and uncompromising code on elusive or idle distinctions (which gave her the appearance of those ancient laws which, besides ferocious prescriptions such as massacring infants at the breast, forbid with exaggerated delicacy the boiling of the kid in its mother's milk, or of eating the nerve of the thigh in an animal). This code, if one judged by the sudden stubbornness that she put in not wanting to do certain commissions that we gave her, seemed to have foreseen social complexities and worldly refinements such as nothing in the entourage of Françoise and in his life as a village servant had not been able to suggest them to him; and one was obliged to say to oneself that there was in it a very old French past, noble and poorly understood, as in those manufacturing cities where old hotels testify that there was once a life of court, and where workers a chemical factory work in the middle of delicate sculptures which represent the miracle of Saint Theophilus or the four sons Aymon. In this particular case, the article of the code, because of which it was unlikely that, except in the case of fire, Françoise would disturb Mum in the presence of Mr. Swann for such a small person as me, simply expressed the respect she professed. not only for parents, - as for the dead, priests and kings, - but also for the stranger to whom we give hospitality, respect which would perhaps have touched me in a book but which irritated me still in her mouth, because of the grave and tender tone she took to talk about it, and more this evening when the sanctity she conferred on dinner had the effect that she would refuse to disturb the ceremony. But to put a chance on my side, I did not hesitate to lie and tell her that it was not at all I who had wanted to write to mum, but that it was mum who, by leaving me, me. had recommended not to forget to send her an answer concerning an object which she had asked me to look for; and she would certainly be very angry if we did not give her that note. I think Françoise did not believe me, for, like primitive men whose senses were more powerful than ours, she immediately discerned, through signs elusive for us, any truth that we wanted to hide from her; she looked for five minutes at the envelope as if examining the paper and the appearance of the writing would educate her about the nature of the content or teach her which section of her code she should refer to. Then she left with an air of resignation which seemed to mean: "Isn't it unfortunate for parents?—And the mouthwashes seemed to me to conceal malevolent and mortally sad pleasures because mum tasted them far from me, opened to me and, like a fruit become sweet which breaks its envelope, was going to make gush, to project until my heart drunk mom's attention as she read my lines. Now I was no longer separated from her; the barriers had fallen, a delicious thread united us. And then, that was not all: mom would undoubtedly come! was more separated from her; the barriers had fallen, a delicious thread united us. And then, that was not all: mom would undoubtedly come! was more separated from her; the barriers had fallen, a delicious thread united us. And then, that was not all: mom would undoubtedly come!
The anguish I had just experienced, I thought Swann would have laughed at if he had read my letter and had guessed its purpose; however, on the contrary, as I learned later, a similar anguish was the torment of long years of his life and no one, as well as he perhaps, could have understood me; him, this anguish that there is to feel the being that one loves in a place of pleasure where one is not, where one cannot join him, it is the love that made her known, the love to which she is in a way predestined, by which she will be monopolized, specialized; but when, as for me, it entered us before it has yet made its appearance in our life, it floats waiting for it, vague and free, without definite affectation, one day at the service of one feeling, the next day for another, sometimes filial tenderness or friendship for a comrade. And the joy with which I did my first apprenticeship when Françoise came back to tell me that my letter would be delivered, Swann had also known that deceptive joy that some friend, some relative of the woman we love, gives us when we arrive at home. At the hotel or at the theater where she is, for some ball, dread, or the first where he is going to find her, this friend sees us wandering outside, desperately waiting for some opportunity to communicate with her. He recognizes us, approaches us familiarly, asks us what we are doing there. And since we invent that we have something urgent to say to his relative or friend, he assures us that nothing is simpler, Uses us into the hall and promises to send it to us before five minutes. That we love her — as I loved Françoise at the moment — the well-intentioned intermediary who, in a word, has just made us bearable, human and almost propitious the inconceivable, infernal party, in which we believed that Enemy, perverse and delicious whirlwinds dragged away from us, making her laugh at us, the one we love. If we judge by him, the relative who accosted us and who is also one of the initiates of the cruel mysteries, the other guests of the festival must not have anything very demonic. These inaccessible and torturing hours when she was going to taste unknown pleasures, here we enter through an unexpected breach; here is one of the moments of which the succession would have composed them, a moment as real as the others, even perhaps more important for us, because our mistress is more involved in it, we represent it to ourselves, we possess it, we intervene in it, we almost created it: the moment when we go tell him we're down there. And undoubtedly the other moments of the feast should not be of a very different essence from this one, should not have anything more delicious and which must have made us suffer so much since the benevolent friend told us: "But she will be happy to come down! It will make her much more pleasure to chat with you than to be bored up there. " Alas! Swann had experienced it, the good intentions of a third party have no power over a woman who is irritated at feeling that she is being pursued even at a party by someone she does not know. do not like. Often the friend comes back down alone.
My mother did not come, and bluntly for my self-esteem (committed to ensuring that the fable of the research of which she was supposed to have asked me to tell her the result was not contradicted) made me say by Françoise these words: "There is no answer" that since then I have so often heard the concierges of "palaces" or the footmen of gambling dens, report to some poor girl who is astonished: "What, he has nothing said, but it's impossible! You delivered my letter well. That's fine, I'll wait some more. " And — just as she invariably assures that she doesn't need the extra burner that the janitor wants to light for her, and stays there, only hearing the few words about the weather exchanged between the janitor and a hunter that he suddenly sends, on noticing the time, to have a customer's drink cool in ice, - having declined Françoise's offer to make me herbal tea or to stay with me, I Let her return to the pantry, I went to bed and closed my eyes, trying not to hear the voice of my parents drinking coffee in the garden. But at the end of a few seconds, I felt that by writing this note to mom, by approaching me, at the risk of angering her, so close to her that I thought I had touched the moment to see her again, I had barred the possibility of falling asleep without seeing it again, and the beating of my heart, minute by minute, became more painful because I increased my restlessness by preaching to myself a calm that was the acceptance of my misfortune. Suddenly my anxiety subsided, a bliss came over me as when a powerful medicine begins to act and takes away a pain: I had just made the resolution to no longer try to fall asleep without having seen mom again, to kiss her cost whatever the cost, although it was with the certainty of being angry with her for a long time afterwards, when she came back to bed. The calm which resulted from my finished anxieties put me in an extraordinary joy, no less than the expectation, the thirst and the fear of danger. I opened the window silently and sat down at the foot of my bed; I hardly made any movement so that I could not be heard from below. Outside, things also seemed to be frozen in a silent, careful not to disturb the moonlight, which doubled and pushed back each thing by the extension in front of her of her reflection, more dense and concrete than herself, had both thinned and enlarged the landscape like a plan folded up until then, which one develops. What needed to move, some chestnut foliage, was moving. But his meticulous, total shudder, executed down to its smallest nuances and its final delicacies, did not drool over the rest, did not blend with it, remained circumscribed. Exposed to this silence which absorbed nothing, the most distant noises, those which must have come from gardens located at the other end of the city, perceived themselves detailed with such a "finish" that they seemed not to owe this effect from afar than to their pianissimo, like these muted motifs so well performed by the orchestra of the Conservatory that although we do not
I knew that the case I was putting myself in was one that could have for me, on the part of my parents, the most serious consequences, much more serious in truth than a stranger could have imagined. those he would have believed that could produce only truly shameful faults. But in the education I was given, the order of faults was not the same as in the education of other children and I was used to placing before all the others (because no doubt he did not there were none that I needed to be more carefully guarded against) those which I now understand have in common that one falls into them by giving in to a nervous impulse. But then we didn't say that word, this origin was not declared, which could have made me believe that I was excusable for succumbing to it or even perhaps unable to resist it. But I recognized them well by the anguish which preceded them as well as by the severity of the punishment which followed them; and I knew that the one I had just committed was from the same family as others for which I had been severely punished, although infinitely more serious. When I went to stand in my mother's way when she went up to bed, and she saw that I had stayed up to say good evening to her again in the hallway, they wouldn't let me stay at home anymore, they would put me in college the next day, that was for sure. Well! had I throw myself out the window five minutes later, I liked it even better.
I heard the footsteps of my parents accompanying Swann; and when the bell on the door warned me that he had just left, I went to the window. Mum would ask my father if he had found the lobster good and if Mr. Swann had taken again coffee and pistachio ice cream. "I found it quite ordinary," said my mother; "I think that next time you will have to try another perfume. "I can't say how I think Swann is changing," said my great-aunt, "he's an old man!" My great-aunt was so used to always seeing the same adolescent in Swann that she was astonished to find him suddenly less young than the age she continued to give him. And my parents, moreover, began to find him this abnormal, excessive old age, shameful and deserved of single people, of all those for whom it seems that the great day which has no tomorrow is longer than for the others, because for them it is empty and the moments have been added since the morning without then being divided among children. "I think he has a lot of trouble with his naughty wife who lives with the knowledge of everything Combray with a certain Monsieur de Charlus. It's the fable of the city." My mother pointed out that he had looked a lot less sad for some time, however. "He also makes this gesture less often, which he has quite like his father, of wiping his eyes and running his hand over his forehead. I think that deep down he no longer loves this woman." "But of course he doesn't love her anymore," replied my grandfather. received a letter from him a long time ago on this subject, to which I hastened not to comply, and which leaves no doubt as to his feelings, at least of love, for his wife. Well! you see, you didn't thank him for the Asti, "added my grandfather, turning to his two sisters-in-law." What, we didn't thank him? I believe, between us, that I even shot it quite delicately ", replied my aunt Flora." Yes, you arranged it very well: I admired you ", said my aunt Céline." But you were you. very good too. "" Yes I was quite proud of my sentence on the kind neighbors. "" What, that's what you call thanking! cried my grandfather. I heard that, but damn if I thought it was for Swann. You can be sure he didn't get it. "" But come on, Swann isn't stupid, I'm sure he liked it. I couldn't tell him the number of bottles and the price of the wine though! "My father and mother were left alone, and sat down for a moment; then my father said," Well! if you want, we'll go upstairs to bed. "" If you want, my friend, although I haven't a shadow of sleep; it was not this harmless coffee ice cream that kept me so awake; but I see light in the pantry and since poor Françoise has been waiting for me, I am going to ask her to undo my blouse while you are going to undress. "And my mother opened the latticed door of the hall which opened on the 'staircase. Soon I heard him coming upstairs to close his window. I walked quietly down the hall; my heart was beating so hard that I could hardly move forward, but at least it was no longer beating with anxiety, but with fear and joy. I saw the light projected by Mom's candle in the stairwell. Then I saw her herself; I rushed forward. At the first second, she looked at me in amazement, not understanding what had happened. Then her face took on an expression of anger, she did not even say a word to me, and indeed for much less than that no one spoke to me for several days. If Mum had said a word to me, it would have been to admit that they could talk to me again and besides that perhaps it would have seemed even more terrible to me, as a sign that, faced with the gravity of the punishment which was about to be prepared, the silence and the estrangement would have been childish. A word would have been the calm with which one answers a servant when one has just decided to dismiss him; the kiss we give to a son we send to enlist when we would have refused it if we were content to be angry with him for two days. But she heard my father coming up from the bathroom where he had gone to undress and to avoid the scene he would make me, she said to me in a voice broken by anger: "Save yourself, save yourself, 'at least your father never saw you like that waiting like a fool! " But I kept telling him: "Come and say goodnight", terrified when I saw that the reflection of my father's candle was already rising on the wall, but also using her approach as a means of blackmail and hoping that mom, to prevent my father from finding me still there if she continued to refuse, would say to me: "Go into your room, I'll come." It was too late, my father was in front of us. Without wanting to, I whispered these words that no one heard: "I'm lost!"
It was not so. My father constantly refused me permissions that had been granted to me in the larger pacts granted by my mother and my grandmother because he did not care about "principles" and that there were not with him. of "Law of the people". For some very contingent reason, or even no reason, he suppressed me at the last moment such a walk so habitual, so consecrated, that I could not be deprived of it without perjury, or else, as he had done again this evening, long before the ritual hour, he would say to me: "Come on, go up to bed, no explanation!" But also, because he had no principles (in the sense of my grandmother), he did not have, strictly speaking, intransigence. He looked at me for a moment looking surprised and angry, then as soon as Mum had explained to him in a few embarrassed words what had happened, he said to her: "But go with him, since you were just saying that you don't want to sleep, stay a little in his room, I don't need anything. " "But, my friend," my mother replied timidly, "whether I want to sleep or not, don't change the situation, you can't get this child used to ..." "But it's not about getting used to , said my father shrugging his shoulders, you can see that this little one is saddened, he looks sorry, this child; see, we are not executioners! When you have made him sick, you will be well advanced Since there are two beds in his room, tell Françoise to prepare the double bed for you and sleep next to him for the night.
You couldn't thank my father; he would have been annoyed by what he called sentimentality. I remained without daring to make a movement; he was still in front of us, tall, in his white nightgown under the purple and pink Indian cashmere that he had tied around his head since he had neuralgia, with the gesture of Abraham in the engraving of 'after Benozzo Gozzoli given to me by M. Swann, telling Sarah that she has to part with Isaac. Many years ago. The wall of the staircase, where I saw the reflection of his candle rise, has not existed for a long time. In me too many things have been destroyed that I believed should last forever and new ones have been built giving birth to new sorrows and joys that I could not have foreseen then, just as the old ones became difficult for me to understand. It is also a long time since my father stopped being able to say to mum: "Go with the little one." The possibility of such hours will never reappear for me. But recently, I began to perceive very well if I listened, the sobs that I had the strength to contain in front of my father and which only burst when I found myself alone with Mom. In fact they never stopped; and it is only because life is now more silent around me that I hear them again, like those convent bells that the noises of the city cover so well during the day that they would be thought to have stopped but which are recovering to ring in the silence of the evening. It is also a long time since my father stopped being able to say to mum: "Go with the little one." The possibility of such hours will never reappear for me. But recently, I began to perceive very well if I listened, the sobs that I had the strength to contain in front of my father and which only burst when I found myself alone with Mom. In fact they never stopped; and it is only because life is now more silent around me that I hear them again, like those convent bells that the noises of the city cover so well during the day that they would be thought to have stopped but which are recovering to ring in the silence of the evening. It is also a long time since my father stopped being able to say to mum: "Go with the little one." The possibility of such hours will never reappear for me. But recently, I began to perceive very well if I listened, the sobs that I had the strength to contain in front of my father and which only burst when I found myself alone with Mom. In fact they never stopped; and it is only because life is now more silent around me that I hear them again, like those convent bells that the noises of the city cover so well during the day that they would be thought to have stopped but which are recovering to ring in the silence of the evening. But recently, I began to perceive very well if I listened, the sobs that I had the strength to contain in front of my father and which only burst when I found myself alone with Mom. In fact they never stopped; and it is only because life is now more silent around me that I hear them again, like those convent bells that the noises of the city cover so well during the day that they would be thought to have stopped but which are recovering to ring in the silence of the evening. But recently, I began to perceive very well if I listened, the sobs that I had the strength to contain in front of my father and which only burst when I found myself alone with Mom. In fact they never stopped; and it is only because life is now more silent around me that I hear them again, like those convent bells that the noises of the city cover so well during the day that they would be thought to have stopped but which are recovering to ring in the silence of the evening.
Mom spent that night in my room; when I had made such a mistake that I expected to be forced to leave the house, my parents gave me more than I ever got from them as a reward for a good deed. Even at the time when it manifested itself by this grace, my father's conduct towards me retained that something arbitrary and undeserved which characterized it and which was due to the fact that it generally resulted rather from fortuitous conveniences than from 'a premeditated plan. Perhaps even what I called his severity, when he sent me to bed, deserved this name less than that of my mother or my grandmother, because his nature, more different in certain points from mine than was theirs, probably hadn't guessed until here how miserable I was every evening, what my mother and my grandmother knew well; but they loved me enough not to consent to spare me from suffering, they wanted to teach me to dominate it in order to decrease my nervous sensitivity and strengthen my will. For my father, whose affection for me was of a different kind, I do not know if he would have had this courage: for once when he had just understood that I was in pain, he had said to my mother : "Go and console him." Mom stayed that night in my room and, as if not to spoil with any remorse those hours so different from what I had the right to hope for, when Françoise, realizing that something extraordinary was happening seeing mom sitting next to me, who held my hand and let me cry without scolding me, asked her: "But Madame, what is Monsieur to cry like that?" Mom replied: "But he doesn't know himself, Françoise, he's upset; quickly prepare the big bed for me and go upstairs to bed." Thus, for the first time, my sadness was no longer considered as a punishable fault but as an involuntary evil that had just been officially recognized, as a nervous state for which I was not responsible; I was relieved to no longer have to mingle scruples with the bitterness of my tears, I could cry without sin. I was not either mediocre proud of Françoise of this return of human affairs, which, an hour after Mum had refused to come up to my room and me. had disdainfully answered that I should sleep, raised me to the dignity of a grown-up, and suddenly made me reach a sort of puberty from sorrow, emancipation from tears. I should have been happy: I was not. It seemed to me that my mother had just made a first concession to me which must have been painful to her, that it was a first abdication on her part from the ideal she had conceived for me, and that for the first time, she, so brave, admitted defeat. It seemed to me that if I had just won a victory it was against her, that I had succeeded, as illness, sorrows, or age might have done, in relaxing her will, in weakening her reason and that this evening was beginning an era, would remain as a sad date. If I' had dared now, I would have said to mom: "No I don't want to, don't sleep here." But I knew the practical, realistic wisdom as it seems today, which tempered in her the ardently idealistic nature of my grandmother, and I knew that, now that the damage was done, she would rather leave me at least. taste the calming pleasure and do not disturb my father. Certainly, my mother's beautiful face still shone with youth that night when she held my hands so gently and tried to stop my tears; but precisely it seemed to me that it should not have been, his anger would have been less sad for me than this new sweetness that my childhood had not known; it seemed to me that I had come from an impious and secret hand to trace in his soul a first wrinkle and to make a first white hair appear there. This thought redoubled my sobs and then I saw Mum, who never indulged in any affection with me, suddenly be won over by mine and try to hold back the urge to cry. As she felt that I had noticed it, she said to me, laughing: "Here is my little jaunet, my little canary, who is going to make his mother as stupid as him, as long as this continues. Let's see, since you haven't not sleepy nor your mom either, let's not get angry, let's do something, let's take one of your books. " But I didn't have any there. "Would you have less fun if I already took out the books that your grandmother is to give you for your birthday? Think well: you won't be disappointed not to have anything the day after tomorrow?" I On the contrary, I was delighted and mom went to look for a bundle of books which I could only guess, through the paper which wrapped them, the short and wide size, but which, under this first aspect, however sketchy and veiled, already eclipsed the box in New Year's Day colors and last year's silkworms. It was the Mare au Diable, François le Champi, the Petite Fadette and the Maîtres Sonneurs. My grandmother, I have since known, had first chosen the poems of Musset, a volume by Rousseau and Indiana; for if she judged futile reading as unhealthy as sweets and pastries, she did not think that the great breaths of genius had on a child's very mind a more dangerous and less invigorating influence than on his body the great outdoors. and the offshore wind. But my father the having almost treated like a fool when she learned the books she wanted to give me, she herself went back to Jouy-le-Vicomte to the bookseller so that I wouldn't risk not having my present (it was a scorching day) and she had come home so ill that the doctor had warned my mother not to let her tire like this) and she had fallen back on the four country novels of George Sand. "My daughter," she said to mum, "I couldn't make up my mind to give this child something badly written." was a scorching day and she had come home so ill that the doctor had warned my mother not to let her tire like this) and she had fallen back on George Sand's four country novels. "My daughter," she said to mum, "I couldn't make up my mind to give this child something badly written." was a scorching day and she had come home so ill that the doctor had warned my mother not to let her tire like this) and she had fallen back on George Sand's four country novels. "My daughter," she said to mum, "I couldn't make up my mind to give this child something badly written."
In reality, she never resigned herself to buying anything from which we could not derive an intellectual benefit, and especially that which beautiful things provide us by teaching us to seek our pleasure elsewhere than in the satisfactions of well-being and vanity. Even when she had to give someone a gift said to be useful, when she had to give an armchair, cutlery, a cane, she looked for "old" them, as if their long obsolescence having erased their usefulness, they seemed more inclined to tell us about the lives of men of old than to serve the needs of our own. She would have liked me to have had photographs of the most beautiful monuments or landscapes in my room. But at the time of shopping, and although the thing represented had an aesthetic value, she found that vulgarity and utility were too quickly resuming their place in the mechanical mode of representation, photography. She tried to trick and if not to eliminate entirely commercial banality, at least to reduce it, to substitute for it for the greater part of art still, to introduce there as several "layers" of art: instead of photographs of the Cathedral of Chartres, of the Grandes Eaux of Saint-Cloud, of Vesuvius, she inquired from Swann if some great painter had not represented them, and preferred to give me photographs of the Cathedral of Chartres by Corot, Grandes Eaux de Saint-Cloud by Hubert Robert, du Vesuvius by Turner, which made one more art degree. But if the photographer had been excluded from the representation of the masterpiece work or nature and replaced by a great artist, he resumed his rights to reproduce this very interpretation. When vulgarity came to an end, my grandmother tried to push it back further. She asked Swann if the work had not been engraved, preferring, when possible, old engravings and still having an interest beyond themselves, for example those which represent a masterpiece. in a state where we can no longer see it today (like the engraving of Leonardo's Last Supper before its degradation, by Morgan). It must be said that the results of this way of understanding the art of giving a gift were not always very brilliant. The idea I took of Venice from a drawing by Titian which is supposed to have the lagoon as a background, was certainly much less exact than what simple photographs would have given me. We could no longer do the count at home, when my great-aunt wanted to draw up an indictment against my grandmother, of the chairs offered by her to young engaged couples or to old spouses, who, at the first attempt had made to use it, had immediately collapsed under the weight of one of the recipients. But my grandmother would have thought it petty to worry too much about the solidity of a woodwork in which still stood out a flower, a smile, sometimes a beautiful imagination of the past. Even what in that furniture met a need, as it was in a way we are no longer used to, charmed her like the old ways of saying where we see a metaphor, erased, in our modern language, by the wear and tear of habit. Now, precisely, the country novels of George Sand that she gave me for my birthday, were full as well as an old furniture, of expressions fallen into disuse and once again imaged, such as one finds only in the countryside. . And my grandmother had bought them in preference to others as she would have rented more willingly a property where there would have been a Gothic dovecote or some of those old things which exert a happy influence on the mind by giving it nostalgia for impossible time travel. expressions that have fallen into disuse and once again become picturesque, such as can only be found in the countryside. And my grandmother had bought them in preference to others as she would have rented more willingly a property where there would have been a Gothic dovecote or some of those old things which exert a happy influence on the mind by giving it nostalgia for impossible time travel. expressions that have fallen into disuse and once again become picturesque, such as can only be found in the countryside. And my grandmother had bought them in preference to others as she would have rented more willingly a property where there would have been a Gothic dovecote or some of those old things which exert a happy influence on the mind by giving it nostalgia for impossible time travel.
Mom sat down next to my bed; it had taken François le Champi, to whom its reddish cover and its incomprehensible title gave me a distinct personality and a mysterious attraction. I had never read real novels before. I had heard that George Sand was the novelist's type. This already prepared me to imagine something indefinable and delicious in François le Champi. The methods of narration intended to arouse curiosity or affection, certain ways of saying which arouse anxiety and melancholy, and which a somewhat educated reader recognizes as common to many novels, seemed to me simple — to me considered a new book not as something having many similarities, but as a unique person, having no reason to exist only in oneself, —a disturbing emanation of the essence peculiar to François le Champi. Under these daily events, these things so common, these words so common, I felt like an intonation, a strange accent. The action began; it seemed all the more obscure to me since at that time, when I read, I often dreamed, for whole pages, of something quite different. And to the gaps that this distraction left in the story, was added, when it was mom who read me aloud, that she skipped all the love scenes. Also all the bizarre changes which occur in the respective attitude of the miller and the child and which can only be explained by the progress of a nascent love seemed to me to be marked with a deep mystery of which I readily imagined that the source must be in this unknown and so sweet name of "Champi" which placed on the child, who carried it without my knowing why, its bright, purple and charming color. If my mother was an unfaithful reader, it was also, for the works where she found the accent of a true feeling, an admirable reader for the respect and the simplicity of the interpretation, for the beauty and the softness of the sound. Even in life, when it was beings and not works of art that thus excited her affection or her admiration, it was touching to see with what deference she dismissed with her voice, her gesture, her words, such a burst of gaiety that could have hurt this mother who had once lost a child, such a reminder of celebration, of birthday, which could have made this old man think of his great age, such a household matter which would have seemed tiresome to this young scholar. Likewise, when she read the prose of George Sand, who always exudes that kindness, that moral distinction that mamma had learned from my grandmother to hold as superior to everything in life, and that I was only supposed to teach her much more. late in not being considered equally superior to everything in books, careful to banish from her voice any littleness, any affectation that might have prevented the mighty flood from being received there, she provided all the natural tenderness, all the ample sweetness that they demanded from these sentences which seemed to have been written for her voice and which, so to speak, were entirely in the register of her sensitivity. To attack them in the right tone she found the cordial accent which preexisted them and dictated them, but which the words do not indicate; thanks to him she dampened all crudeness in the tenses of the verbs in passing, gave to the imperfect and to the definite past the sweetness that there is in kindness, the melancholy that there is in tenderness, directed the sentence that ended towards the one that was about to begin, sometimes pressing, sometimes slowing down the course of the syllables to make them enter, although their quantities were different, in a uniform rhythm, she breathed into this prose so common a kind of sentimental and continuous life.
My remorse was calmed, I let myself go to the sweetness of that night when I had my mother with me. I knew that such a night could not be renewed; that the greatest desire that I had in the world, to keep my mother in my room during these sad nocturnal hours, was too much in opposition to the necessities of life and the wish of all, for the fulfillment that was given to her granted this evening could be something other than factitious and exceptional. Tomorrow my fears would resume and Mom would not stay there. But when my anxieties were calmed, I no longer understood them; then tomorrow evening was still far away; I said to myself that I would have time to advise, although this time could not bring me any more power, that it is
It was thus that, for a long time, when, awake at night, I remembered Combray, I never saw anything other than this sort of luminous section, cut out in the midst of indistinct shadows, like those that the conflagration of '' a Bengal fire or some electric projection illuminate and cut into a building whose other parts remain immersed in the night: at the fairly large base, the small living room, the dining room, the beginning of the dark alley where Monsieur Swann, the unconscious author of my sadness, would arrive, the vestibule where I was heading towards the first step of the staircase, so cruel to climb, which alone constituted the very narrow trunk of this irregular pyramid; and, at the top, my bedroom with the little hallway with a glass door for mom's entrance; in a word, always seen at the same time, isolated from everything that could be around, standing out alone against the darkness, the strictly necessary decor (like the one seen at the top of old pieces for performances in the provinces) , to the drama of my undressing; as if Combray had only consisted of two floors connected by a thin staircase, and as if it had never been more than seven in the evening. To tell the truth, I could have answered whoever had questioned me that Combray understood something else and existed at other times. But as what I would have remembered would have been furnished to me only by voluntary memory, the memory of intelligence, and since the information which it gives on the past does not preserve anything of him, I do not never wanted to think of this leftover from Combray. It was all actually dead to me.
Dead forever? It was possible.
There is a lot of chance in all this, and a second chance, that of our death, often does not allow us to wait long for the favors of the first.
I find the Celtic belief very reasonable that the souls of those we have lost are captive in some lower being, in a beast, a plant, an inanimate thing, indeed lost to us until the day, which for many never comes. , where we find ourselves passing by the tree, entering into possession of the object which is their prison. Then they flinch, call to us, and as soon as we recognize them, the enchantment is broken. Delivered by us, they have conquered death and come back to live with us.
So it is with our past. We are wasting our time trying to evoke it, all the efforts of our intelligence are useless. It is hidden away from its domain and its reach, in some material object (in the sensation that this material object would give us), which we do not suspect. This object, it depends on the chance that we meet it before dying, or that we do not meet it.
It was already many years since, from Combray, all that was not the theater and the drama of my bedtime no longer existed for me, when one winter day, as I was coming home, my mother, seeing that I was cold, suggested that I should have some tea taken, against my custom. I refused at first and, I don't know why, changed my mind. She sent for one of those short, plump cakes called Petites Madeleines which appear to have been molded into the grooved valve of a scallop. And soon, mechanically, overwhelmed by the gloomy day and the prospect of a sad tomorrow, I brought to my lips a spoonful of the tea in which I had let a piece of madeleine soften. But the very moment the mingled sip of the cake crumbs hit my palate, I flinched, attentive to what was happening extraordinary in me. A delicious pleasure had invaded me, isolated, without the notion of its cause. He immediately made the vicissitudes of life indifferent to me, its harmless disasters, its illusory brevity, in the same way that love works, by filling me with a precious essence: or rather this essence was not in existence. me, she was me. I had ceased to feel mediocre, contingent, mortal. Where could this powerful joy have come from? I felt that it was related to the taste of tea and cake, but that it exceeded it infinitely, should not be of the same nature. Where did she come from? What did she mean? Where to apprehend it? I drink a second sip where I find nothing more than in the first, a third which brings a little less than the second. It is time for me to stop, the virtue of the drink seems to be diminishing. It is clear that the truth I am looking for is not in him, but in me. He awakened her there, but does not know her, and can only repeat indefinitely, with less and less force, this same testimony that I do not know how to interpret and that I want at least to be able to ask again and find intact, available to me later for a decisive clarification. I put the cup down and turn to my mind. It's up to him to find the truth. But how? Grave uncertainty, whenever the mind feels overwhelmed by itself; when he, the seeker, is altogether the obscure country where he must seek and where all his baggage will be of nothing to him. Look for? not only: to create.
And I start to wonder again what could be this unknown state, which brought no logical proof, but the evidence of its happiness, of its reality in front of which the others vanished. I want to try to make it reappear. I backslide in thought as I took the first spoonful of tea. I find the same state, without a new clarity. I ask my mind for one more effort, to bring back the fleeing sensation once again. And so that nothing breaks the momentum he is going to try to get hold of her, I remove any obstacle, any foreign idea, I shield my ears and my attention from the noises of the next room. But feeling my mind getting tired without success, I force it on the contrary to take this distraction that I refused to it, to think of something else, to rebuild before a supreme attempt. Then a second time, I empty myself in front of him, I put in front of him the still recent flavor of this first sip and I feel something quiver in me which moves, would like to rise, something that we would have unanchored , at a great depth; I don't know what it is, but it rises slowly; I feel the resistance and I hear the rumor of the distances crossed.
Of course, what pulsates deep inside me must be the image, the visual memory, which, linked to this flavor, tries to follow it to me. But he struggles too far, too confusedly; I hardly perceive the neutral reflection where the elusive whirlwind of stirred colors merges; but I cannot distinguish the form, ask him as the only possible interpreter, to translate for me the testimony of his contemporary, of his inseparable companion, the flavor, ask him to tell me of what particular circumstance, of what period in the past he is.
Will it reach the surface of my clear consciousness, this memory, the ancient moment that the attraction of an identical moment has come from so far away to solicit, move, raise deep within me? I do not know. Now I don't feel anything anymore, he's stopped, maybe come down; who knows if he'll ever come up from his night? Ten times I have to start over, lean towards him. And each time the cowardice that distracts us from any difficult task, any important work, has advised me to leave that, to drink my tea just thinking of my troubles today, of my desires for tomorrow that let go. chew easily.
And all of a sudden the memory appeared to me. This taste was that of the little piece of madeleine that on Sunday morning in Combray (because that day I did not go out before mass), when I went to say hello to her in her room, my aunt Léonie offered me after having soaked it in her tea or lime infusion. The sight of the little madeleine had reminded me of nothing before I had tasted it; perhaps because, having often seen since, without eating it, on the shelves of pastry chefs, their image had left those days of Combray to be linked to other more recent ones; perhaps because of these memories abandoned so long out of memory, nothing survived, everything had disintegrated; the shapes, - and also that of the little pastry shell, so richly sensual, under its severe and devout wrinkling — had abolished themselves, or, sleepy, had lost the force of expansion which would have enabled them to rejoin consciousness. But, when nothing remains from an ancient past, after the death of beings, after the destruction of things, alone, more frail but more lively, more immaterial, more persistent, more faithful, the smell and the flavor remain for a long time. , like souls, to remember, to wait, to hope, on the ruin of all the rest, to carry without wavering, on their almost impalpable droplet, the immense edifice of memory.
And as soon as I recognized the taste of the piece of madeleine dipped in the lime tree that my aunt gave me (although I did not know yet and had to postpone finding out why this memory made me so happy), immediately the old woman gray house on the street, where his room was, came like a theatrical setting applied to the small pavilion, overlooking the garden, which had been built for my parents on its rear (this truncated section that only I had seen until there); and with the house, the city, the Place where I was sent before lunch, the streets where I went shopping from morning until evening and in all weathers, the paths that we took if the weather was good. beautiful. And like in this game where the Japanese have fun dipping in a porcelain bowl filled with water,